🔍 Real-World Behavior of TCP in HTTP/1.1
1. ✅ If client sends requests with:

GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com
Connection: keep-alive
The server assumes:

“The client might send more requests, so I’ll keep the TCP connection open for now.”

Most servers (like Apache, NGINX, Node.js) wait for a timeout — e.g., 5–60 seconds of no activity — before closing the connection automatically.

2. ❌ If client sends:

GET /about HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com
Connection: close
Then the server:

Sends the response

Sends a TCP FIN packet to gracefully close the connection

Triggers the socket.on('end') handler if you're in Node.js

3. 🧍 What happens if you never send Connection: close?
The connection remains open.

If client never sends another request, server will close it after a timeout (idle).

This prevents the server from being overwhelmed with open sockets (called connection leaks if not handled).





👉 Real-world HTTP over TCP:
HTTP/1.0:

One request per TCP connection

Server closes TCP connection after each response

🔁 For multiple resources (e.g., HTML, CSS, JS), the browser creates multiple connections

HTTP/1.1:

Introduced keep-alive by default

Allows multiple requests over the same TCP connection

But still: only one request-response pair at a time

Client or server can still close the connection after a request is done

HTTP/2 and HTTP/3:

Use a single TCP (or QUIC for HTTP/3) connection

Allow multiple streams in parallel (multiplexing)

Much more efficient — avoids opening many TCP connections





In HTTP/1.0:
Each request opens a new TCP connection

After the response, the connection is closed

🧱 Inefficient: slow, wasteful if you request many files (HTML, CSS, JS, images)

🔹 In HTTP/1.1 (✨ persistent connections by default)
HTTP/1.1 introduced connection reuse using:

Connection: keep-alive
This allows:
✅ Multiple requests over a single TCP connection
✅ No need to re-establish TCP handshake for each request

🔹 In HTTP/2 (Even Better)
HTTP/2 allows multiplexing:

Multiple parallel streams (not just sequential like 1.1)

Can send several requests simultaneously on the same connection

Each stream is independent — no blocking if one is slow



🔥 Why is this a problem?
If a large or slow response is first in line, all following responses are delayed

Even if the rest are small and fast

This bottleneck is exactly what HTTP/2 was designed to solve


✅ HTTP/1.1:
There is only one stream per TCP connection.

All HTTP requests and responses must go through that single stream.

Requests are processed in order:
Request 2 waits until Response 1 is fully sent.

That means:
Request 2 waits until response 1 is fully sent

This is called head-of-line blocking (HOL blocking).
This is why HTTP/1.1 suffers from head-of-line (HOL) blocking at the HTTP layer.

✅ HTTP/2:
Uses a single TCP connection, but allows multiple streams.

Each request/response pair is assigned its own stream ID.

All streams are multiplexed, meaning they can:

Be sent in parallel,

Be interleaved,

Be prioritized.

Solves HTTP-level HOL blocking.
